ADR002
======

:Number: 002
:Title: Continue using pickle as default serializer
:Author: Lukas Juhrich
:Created: 2021-06-26
:Status: Postulated

.. contents:: Table of Contents

Context
-------
In the course of upgrading from celery 3 to celery 5,
the default serializer switched from pickle to json
(see `docs <https://docs.celeryproject.org/en/v5.1.1/userguide/security.html#serializers>`_).
We ignored the deprecation warnings urging us to make this decision explicit.

Since the tasks responsible for sending mails contain ``Mail`` objects in their payload,
this causes an error, because the ``json`` backend does not know how to serialize it.
Now we either have to fix the config or switch to another backend like ``json``.

The rationale behind changing the default is that pickle has some security concerns,
and should not be used for untrusted data of any kind.
The ``pickle`` serializer itself is not deprecated.

However, in our setup, the only producer and consumer of messages is pycroft itself,
so no untrusted third party is part of the process.

Using ``json`` is also less convenient in that we would need to specify the (de-)serialization
process for every non-builtin data type.
``pickle`` however can deal with arbitrary python objects out-of-the-box.

Decision
--------
Configure celery explicitly to continue using ``pickle`` instead of ``json``
for seriaization and deserialization.

Consequences
------------
`Configure <https://docs.celeryproject.org/en/stable/history/whatsnew-4.0.html#json-is-now-the-default-serializer>`_
``pickle`` to be the ``task_serializer`` for the client
as well as ``accepted_content`` for the worker.
